# Working with notebooks

While working on a research project,
Jupyter notebooks can be useful for prototyping and data exploration.
If while working interactively in a notebook
you get an output you like, e.g., a figure,
it can be tempting to simply stop right there
and copy/paste it into a research article.
However, in order to keep the project reproducible,
we need to be able to go from raw data to research article
[with a single command](https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1822162),
which of course is not possible in the above scenario.

This is the primary notebook use case Calkit is concerned with:
generating evidence to back up conclusions or answers to research questions.
There are other use cases that are out of scope like using notebooks to build
documentation or interactive web apps for exploring results.
For building [apps](apps.md) (a different concept in a Calkit project),
there are probably better tools out there, e.g.,
[marimo](https://marimo.io/),
[Dash](https://dash.plotly.com/),
[Voila](https://voila.readthedocs.io/en/stable/),
or [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app/).

Here we'll talk about how to take advantage of the interactive nature
of Jupyter notebooks while incorporating them into a reproducible workflow,
avoiding some of the pitfalls that have caused a bit of a
[notebook reproducibility crisis](https://leomurta.github.io/papers/pimentel2019a.pdf).
Returning to the "one project, one command" requirement,
we can focus on three rules:

1. The notebook must be kept in version control.
   This happens naturally since any file included in a Calkit project is
   kept in version control.
   However, it's usually a good idea to exclude notebook output from
   Git commits.
   This can be done by installing `nbstripout` and running
   `nbstripout --install` in the project directory.
1. A notebook must run in one of the project's [environments](environments.md).
1. Notebooks should be incorporated into the project's
   [pipeline](pipeline/index.md).
   It's fine to do some ad hoc work interactively to get the notebook
   working properly, but
   "official" outputs should be generated by calling `calkit run`.
   This means notebooks need to be able to run from top-to-bottom with no
   manual intervention. We'll see how below.

## Creating an environment for a notebook

Assuming you want to run Python in the notebook, you can create an environment
for it with `uv`, `venv`, `conda`, or `pixi`.
For example, if we wanted to create a new `uv-venv` called `py` in our project,
we can execute:

```sh
calkit new uv-venv \
    --name py \
    --prefix .venv \
    --python 3.13 \
    --path requirements.txt \
    jupyter \
    "pandas>=2" \
    numpy \
    plotly \
    matplotlib \
    polars
```

You can then start JupyterLab in this environment with
`calkit xenv -n py jupyter lab`.

Note the environment only needs to be created once per project.
If the project is cloned onto a new machine,
the environment does not need to be recreated,
since that will be done automatically when the project is run.
Also note that it's totally fine and perhaps even preferable to create
a new environment for each notebook, so long as they have different
names, prefixes, and paths---there is no limit to the number
of environments a project can use, and they can be of any type.

## Adding a notebook to the pipeline

A notebook can be added to the pipeline by editing the project's `calkit.yaml`
file directly, using a `jupyter-notebook` stage.
For example:

```yaml
# In calkit.yaml
environments:
  py:
    kind: uv-venv
    prefix: .venv
    python: "3.13"
    path: requirements.txt
pipeline:
  stages:
    my-notebook:
      kind: jupyter-notebook
      environment: py
      notebook_path: notebooks/get-data.ipynb
      inputs:
        - config/my-params.json
      outputs:
        - data/raw/data.csv
      html_storage: dvc
      executed_ipynb_storage: null
      cleaned_ipynb_storage: git
# Optional: Add to project notebooks so they can be viewed on Calkit Cloud
notebooks:
  - path: notebooks/get-data.ipynb
    title: Get data
    stage: my-notebook
```

For this example, we're declaring that the notebook
should use the `py` environment, and that it will read an input
file `config/my-params.json` and produce an output
file `data/raw/data.csv`.
These inputs and outputs will be tracked
along with the notebook and environment content,
to automatically determine if and when the notebook needs to be rerun.
Outputs will also be kept in DVC by default so others can pull them down
without bloating the Git repo.
Output storage is configurable, however, e.g., if you'd like to keep
smaller and/or text-based outputs in Git for simplicity's sake.

Copies of the notebook with and without outputs will be generated as the
notebook is executed, along with an HTML export of the latter.
Storage for these outputs can be controlled with the `html_storage`,
`executed_ipynb_storage`, `cleaned_ipynb_storage` properties,
and they will live inside the project's `.calkit` subdirectory.
The executed `.ipynb` can be rendered on GitHub or
[nbviewer.org](https://nbviewer.org),
and the HTML can be viewed on [calkit.io](https://calkit.io),
the latter of which allows some level of interactivity, e.g., Plotly figures.
The cleaned `.ipynb` can be useful for diffing with Git in cases where
`nbstripout` is not activated.

It's also possible to add a notebook to the pipeline
inside a notebook with the `declare_notebook` function,
which will update `calkit.yaml` automatically.

```python
import calkit

calkit.declare_notebook(
    path="notebooks/get-data.ipynb",
    stage_name="my-notebook",
    environment_name="py",
    inputs=["config/my-params.json"],
    outputs=["data/raw/data.csv"],
    html_storage="dvc",
    executed_ipynb_storage=None,
    cleaned_ipynb_storage="git",
)
```

Note that for this to run properly `calkit-python` must be installed in
the notebook's environment, which in this case is named `py` and whose
packages are listed in `requirements.txt`.
If we didn't include them when creating the environment,
we can simply add `calkit-python` to the `requirements.txt` file and rerun
`calkit xenv -n py jupyter lab`.
The environment will be updated before starting JupyterLab.

## Working interactively

The main advantage of Jupyter notebooks is the ability to work interactively,
allowing us to quickly iterate on a smaller chunk of the process
while the rest remains constant.
For example, if you need to refine a figure,
you can keep updating and running the cell that generates the figure,
without needing to rerun the expensive cell above that generates
or processes the data for it.
In this case our notebook might look like this:

```python
from some_package import run_data_processing

result = run_data_processing(param1=55)
```

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

fig, ax = plt.subplots()
ax.plot(result["x"], result["y"])
```

```python
fig.savefig("figures/my-plot.png")
```

So, with a fresh Jupyter kernel we'll need to run cell 1 in order to generate
`result` so we can iterate on cell 2 to get the plot looking the way
we want it to.
But what if `run_data_processing`
takes minutes, hours, or even days, so therefore we don't want to run it
every time we restart the notebook?
Well, we can use the Calkit `%%stage` cell magic to automatically cache
and retrieve the result.

After adding a cell with:

```python
%load_ext calkit.magics
```

the first cell can be turned into a pipeline stage by changing it to:

```python
%%stage --name run-nb-proc --environment py --out result

from some_package import run_data_processing

result = run_data_processing(param1=55)
```

In the magic command we're giving the cell a unique name,
declaring which environment it should run in
(`py` above, but it can be any environment in the project),
and declaring an output from the cell that we want to be available to
cells below.

Now, the kernel can be restarted and we can use "run all cells above"
when working on the figure,
and we'll have `result` nearly instantaneously.
`result` will also be versioned with DVC and pushed to the cloud by default,
so our collaborators can also take advantage of the caching
without bloating the Git repo.
Execution as part of the project's pipeline will also take advantage of
the caching and will not rerun data processing unless something
about that cell's code or environment has changed.

For a more in-depth look at using the `%%stage` cell magic,
see [this tutorial](tutorials/notebook-pipeline.md).
